Outline
We have already learned all the necessary concepts of game building. So, let's get started with a capstone project of a space invader game to implement all the learnings of Pygame.

Overview

 

Topics introduced
 

Space Invader Game
Activity Explanation 
Topics in Details -
Space Invader Game
The Space Invaders project is a straightforward Python programme. This is a straightforward spacecraft shooting game. In this game, the player must move their shooting gun with the arrow keys and shoot it with the spacebar. For easier gameplay, there is a basic and clear GUI. The player must manoeuvre the gun and aim at the spaceship using the arrow keys. The game has a lot of potentials. So, let's get started with our journey of creating this amazing game.

Activity Explanation 

Part 1: Initialization and Setup

 

1. Importing Libraries and Setting Constants



 

Importing Libraries: This code imports essential Python libraries. math and random are for mathematical operations and generating random numbers. pygame is a library for creating video games.
Constants: These are predefined values like screen size (SCREEN_WIDTH, SCREEN_HEIGHT), player's starting position (PLAYER_START_X, PLAYER_START_Y), and settings for game elements like enemies and bullets.
 
 

2. Initializing Pygame and Creating the Game Window



 

Initializing Pygame: pygame.init() starts all the necessary modules for Pygame.
Creating the Game Window: pygame.display.set_mode() creates the game window with the specified SCREEN_WIDTH and SCREEN_HEIGHT.
 

3. Loading Background, Caption, and Icon

 



Background: Loads 'background.png' as the game's background.
Caption and Icon: Sets the game window title to "Space Invader" and uses 'ufo.png' as the window icon.



4. Initializing the Player



 

Player Image: Loads 'player.png' to represent the player.
Player Position: Initializes the player's position using PLAYER_START_X and PLAYER_START_Y.
Player Movement: playerX_change is for tracking horizontal movement, initially set to 0.

 

Part 2: Enemy and Bullet Setup
 

1. Initializing Enemy Variables

 



Enemy Lists: These lists (enemyImg, enemyX, enemyY, enemyX_change, enemyY_change) will store information for each enemy, such as their image, position, and movement.
Number of Enemies: num_of_enemies is set to 6, meaning there will be six enemies in the game.


 

2. Creating Enemies




 

Loop for Enemies: This loop runs six times (once for each enemy).
Loading Enemy Image: Each enemy gets the same image ('enemy.png').
Random Starting Position: Enemies start at random positions. random.randint is used to choose a random X and Y position within specified limits.
Setting Movement Speed: Each enemy's horizontal (enemyX_change) and vertical (enemyY_change) speeds are set using constants.
 

3. Initializing Bullet Variables

 


 

Bullet Image: Loads the image for the bullet ('bullet.png').
Bullet Position: bulletX and bulletY set the initial position of the bullet. bulletY is set to the player's Y position, so it appears to fire from the player.
Bullet Movement: bulletY_change is the speed at which the bullet moves up the screen. bulletX_change is not used but is included for consistency.
Bullet State: bullet_state can be either "ready" (meaning ready to fire) or "fire" (meaning the bullet is currently moving).





 

Part 3: Score and Text Rendering Functions

 

1. Initializing Score and Game Over Text




 

Sets the initial score to 0 and prepares a font for displaying the score.
Prepare a larger font for displaying the "GAME OVER" message.


 

2. Function to Show Score




 

Converts the score_value to a string and creates a text image which is then drawn on the screen at the specified coordinates.
 

3. Function to Display Game Over Text

 



 

Creates a text image for "GAME OVER" and draws it at a fixed position on the screen.
over_font.render("GAME OVER", True, (255, 255, 255)) creates an image of the text "GAME OVER". The True argument enables anti-aliasing, making the text smoother, and (255, 255, 255) sets the color of the text to white.
 

4. Function to Draw the Player

 



Places the player's image at the given x and y coordinates.


 

5. Function to Draw an Enemy


Places the specified enemy's image at the given x and y coordinates.


 

6. Function to Fire a Bullet
 


 

Uses the global keyword for bullet_state to modify its value.
Changes the state of the bullet to "fire" and draws the bullet image at an offset from the player's position.


 

7. Function to Check for Collision



This function checks whether a bullet has hit an enemy.
It calculates the Euclidean distance between the bullet and the enemy using the formula for the distance between two points in a 2D space: sqrt((x2 - x1)^2 + (y2 - y1)^2).
If this distance is less than COLLISION_DISTANCE, it means the bullet is close enough to the enemy to be considered a collision, and the function returns True. Otherwise, it returns False